Add decision record about JavaScript browser compatibility (#25)
alphagov/govuk-design-system-architecture: decision-records/006-javascript-compatibility.md

# JavaScript browser compatibility

## Decision

We will ship JavaScript that can parse without errors in browsers supporting `<script type="module">`.

We will update our guidance to tell service teams to include the JavaScript from GOV.UK Frontend using `<script type="module">`.

We will set up:

- transpiling to transform modern code down to that baseline
- linting to prevent us from using newer features and syntaxes

Going forward, when we want to use a newer feature we will disable the linting rule only after checking the performance impact of the transformation.

We don't believe we need to introduce any polyfills for the components that currently exist, so for now the transpilation step will not include any. We will revisit this when we want to introduce a new feature that would require polyfills.

> In order to keep only style components as interactive when the JavaScript is going to be included, we will [add a new class govuk-frontend-supported to the body](https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-frontend/pull/3801) as part of the inline script if the browser supports HTMLScriptElement.prototype.nomodule and add a guard clause to the initialisation of each component.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to keep only style components as interactive when the JavaScript is going to be included, we will [add a new class govuk-frontend-supported to the body](https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-frontend/pull/3801) as part of the inline script if the browser supports HTMLScriptElement.prototype.noModule and add a guard clause to the initialisation of each component.
```

- improves the developer experience, as we provide additional safety guards against using unsupported features
- enables us to use a modern syntax, including future features as long as our tooling can transpile it

At the same time, we need to recognise that we are deferring some of the responsibility of ensuring browser compatibility to our linting and transpilation tools.

If we find that the transpilation is not producing code that works in the targeted browsers, we may be relying on the maintainers of those dependencies to help us address issues.

We will also need to carefully monitor the impact of transpilation as the code we ship will potentially be further removed from the code we author.

### Improving the experience on older devices

Restricting JavaScript to running only on browsers that support type="module" means that it will not run on the oldest browsers, which are likely to be on old, underpowered devices. This means that users on older devices will get a simplified, but likely more performant experience.

### Pins the JavaScript we ship to 2017

This approach pins us to shipping code based on browsers that shipped in 2017.

> [STATS about browser usage to illustrate long tail]

Reviewer 2: These needs to be added before we merge this.

# JavaScript browser compatibility

Date: 27/06/23

Status: Accepted

## Decision

> We will ship JavaScript that can parse without errors in browsers supporting `<script type="module">`.

Reviewer: Sorry @romaricpascal I'm going to suggest we swap "ship" with "publish" consistently

```suggestion
We will publish JavaScript that can be parsed without errors in browsers supporting `<script type="module">`.
```

We will update our guidance to tell service teams to include the JavaScript from GOV.UK Frontend using `<script type="module">`.

We will set up:

> - transpiling to transform modern code down to that baseline

Reviewer: Do we need to be specific about what "that baseline" means?

```suggestion
- transpiling to transform modern JavaScript to ES2015
```

> - linting to prevent us from using newer features and syntaxes

Reviewer: Do we need to clarify that we _can_ use newer features where transpiling helps us out?

```suggestion
- linting to prevent us using modern JavaScript that cannot be transpiled
```

Author: Rephrased to describe that we still intend to opt in to newer features, as it's not so much that they can't be transpiled, more that we decide not to transpile them.

> Going forward, when we want to use a newer feature we will disable the linting rule only after checking the performance impact of the transformation.

Reviewer: Can potentially scrub this line if we clarify it above?

```suggestion
```

Author: I kept it as I think it's important to highlight we decided we won't opt in to things "just because", but have first a check on their impact.

> We don't believe we need to introduce any polyfills for the components that currently exist, so for now the transpilation step will not include any. We will revisit this when we want to introduce a new feature that would require polyfills.

Reviewer: Probably remove this paragraph if it's not a decision?

Or turn it into a decision? Few things to extract:

1. We might use feature detection to guard functionality behind progressive enhancement
2. We might use polyfills to enable functionality for all `<script type="module">` users
3. We might avoid polyfills when they affect browser performance or file sizes

Author: Clarified that I was trying to record the fact that we'd set up Babel to only add transformations and not polyfill. I think the options for polyfilling are outlined in the browser support docs.

> Our current components do not require any polyfills. We set up the transpilation to only make [syntax transformations](https://babeljs.io/docs/babel-preset-env) and [bundle (to avoid having a dependency) Babel helpers](https://github.com/rollup/plugins/tree/master/packages/babel#babelhelpers) , not automatically [inject third party polyfills](https://github.com/babel/babel-polyfills). We will revisit this when we want to introduce a new feature that would require polyfills.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our current components do not require any polyfills. We set up the transpilation to only make [syntax transformations](https://babeljs.io/docs/babel-preset-env) and [bundle (to avoid having a dependency) Babel helpers](https://github.com/rollup/plugins/tree/master/packages/babel#babelhelpers), not automatically [inject third party polyfills](https://github.com/babel/babel-polyfills). We will revisit this when we want to introduce a new feature that would require polyfills.
```

### Decision overhead

We're planning to opt-in to the use of specific modern features only after assessing their impact on the transformed code. This might lead to an overhead for researching and documenting that impact, as well as making the decision of whether to opt-in or not.

### Tooling isn't comprehensive

We're not sure of the exact coverage our tools will provide for either checking the use of features or transforming them down to ES 2015.

For example, [eslint-plugin-es-x](https://eslint-community.github.io/eslint-plugin-es-x/) does not cover Web APIs and there's an engineering cost to [using the transpilation step for detecting whether polyfills would need including](https://github.com/babel/babel-polyfills/pull/13/files) reliably (especially if we guard the execution of some of our features to the presence of specific APIs in the browsers, for which we wouldn't want a polyfill).

This means we still need some level of manual checks, which are susceptible to human errors.

### Tooling evolution

> The tools we plan to use may evolve to only support a more modern baseline than ES 2015 (similarly to how Rollup stopped supporting IE8 at some point). This could force us to pin our tools to a specific version if we want to keep benefiting from them, devise a new approach for ensuring our compatibility, or revisit our baseline (this would require a major release though).

Reviewer: Minor little things?

```suggestion
The tools we plan to use may evolve to only support a more modern baseline than ES2015 (similarly to how Rollup stopped supporting Internet Explorer 8 at some point). This could force us to pin our tools to a specific version if we want to keep benefiting from them, devise a new approach for ensuring our compatibility, or revisit our baseline (this would require a major release though).
```

> ### Shipped code monitoring

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Published code monitoring
```

> We're doing heavier transformations of our code between what we author and what we ship. This provides more room for malicious code to potentially be introduced by our tooling (supply chain attacks).

Reviewer: Probably want to match [these ship/publish/source changes](https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-design-system-architecture/pull/25#discussion_r1263762976)

```suggestion
By making further transformations of our source code into published code, we potentially provide more room for malicious code to be introduced by our tooling (supply chain attacks).
```

Monitoring the changes from one release to another may also be trickier as tooling updates may introduce extra changes to the code (for example refactoring or reordering...) that would make comparison harder.

## Alternatives considered

### Adding the styling hook using type="module"

The inline script adding the `govuk-frontend-supported` class cannot be run in a `<script type="module">`. This would defer the execution of the script adding the class until after the page loads. This defeats the purpose of that script, as it needs to run immediately so it prevents flashes of non-interactive styles.

> ### Shipping the code we author

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Publishing our source code
```

> We could author ES2015 code and ship what we author.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We could publish our ES2015 source code.
```

Author: I added your suggestion and the precision that this option was to ship the code without setting up any transformations (ie. author ES2015)

While we could lint away some compatibility concerns, this would require more manual testing to ensure we match what the browsers we support can parse and execute.

Due to the more manual nature, it would also be more prone to bugs and regressions.

And finally, due to the extra knowledge necessary to know what's compatible or not, it would require extra effort from developers and contributors to offer changes.

> ### Guarding based on newer ES versions and letting JavaScript error

Reviewer: Could say "ECMAScript versions" or "browser APIs" (as above), best to be consistent

```suggestion
### Guarding based on browser APIs or letting JavaScript throw errors
```

Author: We're effectively guarding on APIs so changed to that (though without browser as it may be an EcmaScript API that we're picking, like Promise.prototype.finally). Kept "error" only as it may be a parsing error as well, not just something thrown.

Instead of using the availability of `HTMLScriptElement.prototype.noModule` to set the `govuk-frontend-supported` class (which governs both styling and execution of our components), we could:

- pick a more modern feature to check (for example `Promise.prototype.finally`)

> - transpile down to the more modern set of browsers that support it (rather than all the way down to 2017)

Reviewer: Shall we stick to ES2015 rather than 2017? (The year that browsers rolled out support)

```suggestion
- transpile down to the more modern set of browsers that support it (rather than all the way down to ES2015)
```

> - and let JavaScript error in browsers that support `type="module"` but not the newer features that appear in the code we ship

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- and let JavaScript error in browsers that support `type="module"` but not the newer features that appear in the code we publish
```

This would further reduce the amount of features that get transpiled (most notable would be spread `...` and `async/await` if we chose `Promise.prototype.finally`). However this comes with the following drawbacks:

- The extra errors in browsers that support `type="module"` but not our new baseline makes it harder to know if the error is expected (because the browser is not supported) or not. This complicates both the debugging for our users and the triaging of bugs for us.
- Because of syntax errors, service code bundled with GOV.UK Frontend would not get a chance to be executed at all. This would require extra effort on the services part to decide what can be bundled with GOV.UK Frontend and what needs to be in a separate script to ensure it runs.

### Recommending dynamic import of GOV.UK Frontend

Using a dynamic `import()` call would allow to handle syntax errors when parsing GOV.UK Frontend (via a `.catch` on the promise, or a `try/catch` block, depending on the browsers you'd want to support).

> This complicates the integration for services as it requires more JavaScript knowledge to understand which piece of code will run or not if GOV.UK Frontend fails to parse. It also complicates the import of multiple individual components, requiring to make sure the `import()` calls run in parallel to not hinder performance (on top of the individual components not being discoverable by [the browsers' preload-scanner](https://web.dev/preload-scanner/)), but handle the potential failure of these calls appropriately.

Reviewer: Do we need to mention the opposite?

That as our JavaScript takes longer and longer to run, we'll delay the initialisation of components that run last (as they get queried, looped and have `init()` run)

Author: What do you mean by "the opposite"? I'm sure I understand what leads to "our JavaScript takes longer and longer to run" (only thing I come to mind is the growing number of transformations that will make our file size grow).

Reviewer: Sorry I was commenting on "`import()` calls run in parallel"

As in, do we need to comment on "the opposite" benefits of Promises?

1. By supporting sequential `.init()`, we can simplify integration by avoiding Promises
2. By supporting concurrent `.init()`, we can avoid render blocking from slow `forEach()`

Or shall we remove anything that can be moved to an API decision record?

## Implications

### Automating parts of the development process

When writing or changing JavaScript we currently have to remember not to use features that aren't available in the oldest browsers we support, or to manually add a polyfill. We also rely heavily on manual testing across multiple browsers.

Improving our build process by introducing transpilation and additional linting rules:

- improves the developer experience, as we provide additional safety guards against using unsupported features
- enables us to use a modern syntax, including future features as long as our tooling can transpile it

At the same time, we need to recognise that we are deferring some of the responsibility of ensuring browser compatibility to our linting and transpilation tools.

If we find that the transpilation is not producing code that works in the targeted browsers, we may be relying on the maintainers of those dependencies to help us address issues.

> We will also need to carefully monitor the impact of transpilation as the code we ship will potentially be further removed from the code we author.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We will also need to carefully monitor the impact of transpilation as the code we publish will potentially be further removed from our source code.
```

### Improving the experience on older devices

Restricting JavaScript to running only on browsers that support `type="module"` means that it will not run on the oldest browsers, which are likely to be on old, underpowered devices. This means that users on older devices will get a simplified, but likely more performant experience.

> ### Pins the JavaScript we ship to 2017

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Pins the JavaScript we publish to 2017
```

> This approach pins us to shipping code based on browsers that shipped in 2017.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This approach pins us to publishing code based on browsers that were released in 2017.
```

With the exception of Internet Explorer 11 (for which we've decided to not provide JavaScript enhancements for), [this target](https://browsersl.ist/#q=supports+es6-module) covers further than [the 95%](https://www.gov.uk/service-manual/technology/designing-for-different-browsers-and-devices#understanding-the-table) of [visits to GOV.UK (internal link)](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/17gcoKyQy6YnfcBG6LGIkNKi6VVOz9nc_EffvA39o98Y/edit#slide=id.g1bee1a35b37_0_83).

> The target creates a long tail of browsers that users no longer use and for which we'll ship code transformations. This long tail will only expand as browser vendors ship newer versions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The target creates a long tail of browsers that users no longer use and for which we'll publish code transformations. This long tail will only expand as browser vendors release newer versions.
```

We need to be mindful that:

> - some of the transformations may add extra weight to the JS that are only required for a tiny percentage of users

Reviewer: Could we make this a tiny bit more obvious?

Assuming we're talking about the trade off in KB file size versus just guarding an optional feature

```suggestion
- some of the transformations may add extra file size to the JS to provide compatibility to only a tiny percentage of users
```
